The Chemical History of a Candle
Lecture I - A Candle: The Flame - Its Sources - Structure - Mobility - Brightness
Michael Faraday

I purpose, in return for the honour you do us by coming to see what are our proceedings here, to bring before you, in the course of these lectures, the Chemical History of a Candle. I have taken this subject on a former occasion; and were it left to my own will, I should prefer to repeat it almost every year - so abundant is the interest that attaches itself to the subject, so wonderful are the varieties of outlet which it offers into the various departments of philosophy. There is not a law under which any part of this universe is governed which does not come into play, and is not touched upon, in these phenomena. There is no better, there is no more open door by which you can enter into the study of natural philosophy, than by considering the physical phenomena of a candle. I trust, therefore, I shall not disappoint you in choosing this for my subject rather than any newer topic, which could not be better, were it even so good.

And, before proceeding, let me say this also - that though our subject be so great, and our intention that of treating it honestly, seriously, and philosophically, yet I mean to pass away from all those who are seniors amongst us. I claim the privilege of speaking to juveniles as a juvenile myself. I have done so on former occasions - and, if you please, I shall do so again. And though I stand here with the knowledge of having the words I utter given to the world, yet that shall not deter me from speaking in the same familiar way to those whom I esteem nearest to me on this occasion.

And now, my boys and girls, I must first tell you of what candles are made. Some are great curiosities. I have here some bits of timber, branches of trees particularly famous for their burning. And here you see a piece of that very curious substance taken out of some of the bogs in Ireland, called candle-wood, a hard, strong, excellent wood, evidently fitted for good work as a resister of force, and yet so full of material fit for burning that if you cut a slice of it, you may light it as easily as a piece of wax, and yet it is wood. But we have the real candle here. Here is a candle manufactured by a process which has only been known for a few years - that of pressing together the materials of which the candle is made. Here is a better candle of the old sort. It is made of tallow, and you will see that it burns with a bright flame, but it also produces a good deal of smoke. Now I have a still better candle, and that is made of wax. You see that it burns still more beautifully than the last.

And now let us look a little more carefully at what happens when we light a candle. You see there is a beautiful cup formed around the wick, in which is contained the melted fuel; and you see the flame, which is the seat of the chemical action that produces the light and heat.

[Public domain - Faraday Christmas Lectures excerpt. Skybrary STEM pack.]